feat: Add type restrictions to JSON syntax (#7)
openfga/rfcs: 20220831-add-type-restrictions-to-json-syntax.md

# Meta
- **Name**: Add Type Restrictions to the JSON Syntax
- **Start Date**: 2022-08-31
- **Author(s)**: @rhamzeh
- **Status**: Draft <!-- Acceptable values: Draft, Approved, On Hold, Superseded -->
- **RFC Pull Request**: https://github.com/openfga/rfcs/pull/5
- **Relevant Issues**:
  - https://github.com/openfga/rfcs/pull/3
  - https://github.com/openfga/rfcs/pull/4
  - https://github.com/openfga/api/pull/27
- **Supersedes**: N/A

# Summary

> Allow users to indicate in their store's authorization model what types of objects are can have a particular relation to an object type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Allow users to indicate in their store's authorization model what types of objects can have a particular relation to an object type.
```

# Definitions

- [OpenFGA JSON Syntax]()
- [OpenFGA DSL]()
- [ListObjects Endpoint]()

# Motivation

## Why should we do this?

### Optimize ListObjects
In order to implement some optimizations to the ListObjects endpoint mentioned [ListObjects RFC](https://github.com/openfga/rfcs/blob/main/20220714-listObjects-api.md), we should be able to traverse the relationship graph in reverse.

### Improve the Developer Experience

> At the moment, our authorization model allows users to indicate we do not have any restrictions on what the 

Reviewer: incomplete sentence

# What it is?
This RFC proposes an update to the OpenFGA JSON syntax requiring users to indicate all the types of users that could be **directly related** to an object of a certain type through a particular relation.

For example,
- parents of a document have to be objects of type folder
- owners of a repository have to be of type user or a userset of group members

We will add an `assignable_relations` to each relation to indicate what types of users can be directly related to it.

`assignable_relations` will be an array of objects, each object must have a type and an optional relation.
- having the following `"parent": { "assignable_relations": [{ "type": "group" }] }` in the group type definition indicates that only users of type group can be directly related to a group as parent
- having the following `"member": { "assignable_relations": [{ "type": "user" }, { "type": "group", "relation": "member" }] }` in the group type definition indicates that only objects of type user or usersets of type group and relation member can be directly related to a group as member

> - having the following `"member": { "assignable_relations": [{ "type": "user:*" }, { "type": "employee:*" }] }` in the group type definition indicates that the `*` syntax is allowed and that when present, it means all objects of type user or group can be directly related to a group as member

Reviewer: I am confused with the sentence.  Where does `group` come into the definition? I only see `user` and `employee` in the model.  Also, maybe more explicit in saying that `*` is not allowed in the other two cases?

Reviewer 2: `member` is a relation of `group`.

ListObjects will be the first of the Relationship Query endpoints to take advantage of this new functionality. Our hope is that we can start building a more performant ListObjects endpoint using the new type restrictions.

### Updating Expand to Respect Type Restrictions

Expand will need to be updated to ignore tuples that do not match the assignable tuples in the authorization model.

### Updating Check to Respect Type Restrictions 

THis will be the final phase and should be undertaken only once we are completely confident of how ListObjects and Expand are performing with the new functionality. Check is the core of OpenFGA, and we should be deligint in making sure it does not break and that any changes are properly communicated.

When the time comes, check will be updated to ignore tuples that do not match the assignable tuples in the authorization model.

# Migration

## Migrating existing authorization models

Existing models will not be migrated - new models will be required to use types (with an optional grace period). Authorization models that do not make use of types will not be able to use the optimized ListObjects endpoint.

## Migrating existing tuples

> Due to the users in the tuples now required to have types, existing tuples with users as floating user_ids will no longer be valid when types are added. This will need to be communicated to users so that they can migrate accordingly. 

Reviewer: Does it mean that only updates to these existing tuples are affected or these tuples will be "orphaned" that will have no effects in the system?

Reviewer: Example of what is meant by `floating user_ids`?

Author: Added a definition of Users and floating user IDs to the top and clarified what happens to existing tuples with user ids lacking type info

- having the following `"member": { "assignable_relations": [{ "type": "user" }, { "type": "group", "relation": "member" }] }` in the group type definition indicates that only objects of type user or usersets of type group and relation member can be directly related to a group as member
- having the following `"member": { "assignable_relations": [{ "type": "user:*" }, { "type": "employee:*" }] }` in the group type definition indicates that the `*` syntax is allowed and that when present, it means all objects of type user or group can be directly related to a group as member

This will affect only relations that are [directly related](https://openfga.dev/docs/modeling/building-blocks/direct-relationships) (as in they are considered "assignable" and have [the direct relationship keyword ("this")](https://openfga.dev/docs/configuration-language#the-direct-relationship-keyword) in their relation definition).
For relation definitions that:
- have the direct relationship keyword (this): this key must be present in `assignable_relations` and MUST be an non-empty array containing at least one type/relation combination

> - do not have the direct relationship keyword: this key must be present in `assignable_relations` and MUST be an empty array

Reviewer: Curious why the user needs to define an empty array when we know that there is no direct relationship

Author: Will make it optional

2. When assignable relations are passed, we need to check that:
   1. the type is an existing type in the system
   2. the relation is either empty or exists on the type
   3. no duplicates are present

```javascript
{ "type_definitions": [
  { "type": "user" },
  { "type": "group",
    "relations": {
      "relation-1": { "this": {} },
      "relation-2": { "this": {} },
      "relation-3": { "this": {} },
      "relation-4": { "this": {} },
      "relation-5": { "this": {} },
      "relation-6": { "this": {} },
      "relation-7": { "computedUserset": { "object": "", "relation": "relation-6"} },
      "relation-8": { "computedUserset": { "object": "", "relation": "relation-7"} }
    },
    "metadata": {
      "relations": {
        "relation-1": { "assignable_relations": [{ "type": "user" }] }, // valid, user exists as a type
        "relation-2": { "assignable_relations": [{ "type": "group", "relation": "relation-1" }] }, // valid, group exists as a type, and relation-1 exists on that type
        "relation-3": { "assignable_relations": [] }, // invalid, relation-3 allows direct relationships, but no assignable relations are set

>         "relation-4": { "assignable_relations": [{ "type": "user" }] }, // invalid, relation-4 does not allow direct relationships, but an assignable relations has been set

Reviewer: I am confused - isn't this identical to `relation-1` ?

- **RFC Pull Request**: https://github.com/openfga/rfcs/pull/5
- **Relevant Issues**:
  - https://github.com/openfga/rfcs/pull/3
  - https://github.com/openfga/rfcs/pull/4
  - https://github.com/openfga/api/pull/27
- **Supersedes**: N/A

## Summary

Allow users to indicate in their store's authorization model what types of objects can have a particular relation to an object type.

## Definitions

- [OpenFGA JSON Syntax](https://openfga.dev/docs/configuration-language)
- [OpenFGA DSL](https://openfga.dev/docs/configuration-language)
- [ListObjects Endpoint](https://openfga.dev/api/service#/Relationship%20Queries/ListObjects)
- [What is a user?](https://openfga.dev/docs/concepts#what-is-a-user)
- Floating User ID: A user identifier without a type (e.g. `anne`, `4` or `4179af14-f0c0-4930-88fd-5570c7bf6f59`)

## Motivation

### Why should we do this?

#### Optimize ListObjects

In order to implement some optimizations to the ListObjects endpoint mentioned [ListObjects RFC](https://github.com/openfga/rfcs/blob/main/20220714-listObjects-api.md), we should be able to traverse the relationship graph in reverse.

#### Improve the Developer Experience

> At the moment, our authorization model does not allow users to indicate what the type they expect on a relation to be, leaving it a bit open-ended and up for interpretation, especially when someone is reading the authorization model later without much context and where the original authors are not available. It is hard for someone to grok from first glance that a repository owner should be an organization or a user. Adding type restrictions allows developers to have an easier time in interpreting the model.

Author: Done

### What is the expected outcome?

- Using the extra type information we get from this change, we will be able to more easily traverse the graph in reverse, thus allowing us to provide a solution for reverse expansion and optimizing the ListObjects endpoint.

> - Users reading an authorization model will be able to better interpret its meaning (for example by understanding that repository owners must be either users or group members).

Author: I think alternative 1 makes reading the model is better for understanding, but even this level of typing improves it over nothing.

Think of the GitHub model: https://play.fga.dev/sandbox/?store=github

Both `repo` and `org` have an `owner` relation. How is someone outside the person who created the model supposed to know that an org can be an owner of a repo?

Normally they'd have to have documentation on the side. This helps make it a bit clearer inline.

> - Users reading an authorization model will be able to better interpret its meaning (for example by understanding that repository owners must be either users or group members).

Reviewer 2: 👍

## What it is?

This RFC proposes an update to the OpenFGA JSON syntax requiring users to indicate all the types of users that could be **directly related** to an object of a certain type through a particular relation.

For example,

- parents of a document have to be objects of type folder
- owners of a repository have to be of type user or a userset of group members

We will add an `assignable_relations` to each relation to indicate what types of users can be directly related to it.

`assignable_relations` will be an array of objects, each object must have a type and an optional relation.

> - having the following `"parent": { "assignable_relations": [{ "type": "group" }] }` in the group type definition indicates that only users of type group can be directly related to a group as parent

Author: Fixed

- having the following `"member": { "assignable_relations": [{ "type": "user:*" }, { "type": "employee:*" }] }` in the group type definition indicates that the `*` syntax is allowed and that when present, it means all objects of type user or group can be directly related to a group as member

This will affect only relations that are [directly related](https://openfga.dev/docs/modeling/building-blocks/direct-relationships) (as in they are considered "assignable" and have [the direct relationship keyword ("this")](https://openfga.dev/docs/configuration-language#the-direct-relationship-keyword) in their relation definition).
For relation definitions that:

- have the direct relationship keyword (this): this key must be present in `assignable_relations` and MUST be an non-empty array containing at least one type/relation combination
- do not have the direct relationship keyword: this key must be present in `assignable_relations` and MUST be an empty array

> > Note: This syntax does not offer a way to enforce restrictions based on what the userset of group members resolves to. Later on, tooling can help visually indicate this to the user.

Reviewer 2: i don't understand this note

Author: Will add a note about that, but whether group#member resolves to user, employee or group - this syntax does not offer a way to restrict that

Author: Updated

To prevent breaking changes, this will be done by appending a new field called `metadata` -> `relations` to each type definition. Each relation will be a key under this that is a map that contains a field called `assignable_relations` that contains what type or type and relation combination could be directly related to it.

> If a tuple such as `user=team:1#member, relation=member, object=group:2` needs to be added, then the `member` relation on the `group` type must have `{"type":"group","relation":"member""}` as one of its assignable types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a tuple such as `user=team:1#member, relation=member, object=group:2` needs to be added, then the `member` relation on the `group` type must have `{"type":"group","relation":"member"}` as one of its assignable types.
```

Author: Fixed

   - write(user=group:2#parent, member, group:1); invalid, the (type=group, relation=parent) is not in the list of assignable relations for the member relation of the group type
   - write(user=group:2#parent, parent, group:1); invalid, the (type=group, relation=parent) is not in the list of assignable relations for the parent relation of the group type

3. If the user is `*`:
   - `write(user=*, parent, group:1)`; invalid, the `parent` relation on the `group` type does not allow for any `*` relation
   - `write(user=*, member, group:1)`; valid, the `member` relation on the `group` type allows for the `*` relation (and it will be considered all objects of type `user`)

#### Updating ListObjects to Respect Type Restrictions

ListObjects will be the first of the Relationship Query endpoints to take advantage of this new functionality. Our hope is that we can start building a more performant ListObjects endpoint using the new type restrictions.

#### Updating Expand to Respect Type Restrictions

Expand will need to be updated to ignore tuples that do not match the assignable tuples in the authorization model.

#### Updating Check to Respect Type Restrictions

> THis will be the final phase and should be undertaken only once we are completely confident of how ListObjects and Expand are performing with the new functionality. Check is the core of OpenFGA, and we should be deligint in making sure it does not break and that any changes are properly communicated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will be the final phase and should be undertaken only once we are completely confident of how ListObjects and Expand are performing with the new functionality. Check is the core of OpenFGA, and we should be diligent in making sure it does not break and that any changes are properly communicated.
```

> When the time comes, check will be updated to ignore tuples that do not match the assignable tuples in the authorization model.

Reviewer 2: So you mean that it will throw an error if the user passed in the request is not of the right type? Because if so, we're not "ignoring tuples" 🤔 we're simply rejecting more requests

Author: Check will not throw an error - when the time comes, it will ignore whatever is in the database that is not of a matching type to the provided authorization model id.

So if there is a tuple that says (`user=group:2#member, relation=reader, object=repo:openfga`) and another that says (`user=user:anne, relation=member, object=group:2`)

But the assignable relations on `repo`->`admin` do not include `{ "type": "group", "relation": "member" }` then the first relationship tuple will be ignored and a check on (`user=user:anne, relation=reader, object=repo:openfga`) will return false

## Migration

### Migrating existing authorization models

> Existing models will not be migrated - new models will be required to use types (with an optional grace period). Authorization models that do not make use of types will not be able to use the optimized ListObjects endpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Existing models will not be migrated - new models will be required to use types (with an optional grace period). Authorization models that do not make use of types will not be able to use the optimized ListObjects endpoint and will fallback to the existing brute force implementation.
```

Author: Fixed

### Migrating existing tuples

Due to the users in the tuples now required to have types in order to enforce the restrictions, existing tuples with users as floating user identifiers with no types will no longer be valid when types are added. These tuples will not be removed from the system, and will still be valid while the legacy authorization model is supported, but will be ignored during evaluation on newer authorization models with type restrictions in place.

> This will need to be communicated to users so that they can migrate accordingly.

Reviewer 2: How will they migrate? They'll have to see the offending tuples, remove them, and write the new ones?

Author: Added a note on that

> One option could be that a script to check the DB (look for tuples in the DB that do not have `user_type`), and prints the offending store IDs.

Reviewer 2: Is this for us or for them?

Author: Whoever is administrating an OpenFGA installation

> Automatic unassisted tuple migration will not be feasible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Automatic unassisted tuple migration will not be feasible because we cannot know what type they will want to use for each offending tuple.
```

Author: Added

#### Language, API and SDKs

For the scope of this RFC, we are proposing that the initial phase be backwards compatible and not a breaking change. This will allow users on previous versions to keep using them for a while, similarly changes to the public surface of the API and SDKs are reduced.

A later RFC can introduce the upgraded syntax where the extension now placed in metadata can be migrated. That phase can be combined with other breaking changes we are introducing to minimize user-disruption.

#### DSL

An update to teh DSL needs to be drafted to support the inclusion of the type restrictions, this should come in a later RFC.

#### Syntax Transformer and Playground

Syntax transformer will need to be updated to support both the new JSON syntax and the new DSL it maps to, as well as all the necessary validations.

### Roadmap

1. This RFC is drafted
2. The [openfga/api#27](https://github.com/openfga/api/pull/27) PR introduces the new fields into the proto-files

> 3. The DSL & [openfga/syntax-transformer](https://github.com/openfga/syntax-transformer) are updated to allow empty user type

Reviewer 2: This was not part of this RFC 🤔

Author: Added a note on this in the DSL migration above

4. [openfga/openfga.dev](https://github.com/openfga/openfga.dev) is updated to use the user type across the board
5. [openfga/openfga](https://github.com/openfga/openfga)
   1. Validation is added to prevent writing models with invalid type restrictions (e.g. restricting to a type that does not exist)
   2. Validation is added to prevent writing tuples that do not match the type restrictions

>    3. Read implementations are updated to take the types into consideration

Reviewer 2: I thought we were not going to touch any APIs except ListObjects

Author: Initially no, but we will have to once everything else is validated otherwise check, expand and list objects will be returning inconsistent data

Reviewer 2: Ok, should we add step 5.4 for List objects? And then a new step 12 for check and expand?

Author: Added

6. An RFC for the updated DSL that supports type restrictions is drafted
7. [openfga/syntax-transformer](https://github.com/openfga/syntax-transformer) is updated with support for the new DSL and JSON syntax
8. Playground is updated with the latest syntax-transformer changes
9. [openfga/sdk-generator](https://github.com/openfga/sdk-generator) is updated to reflect the changes in the proto files
10. [openfga/sample-stores](https://github.com/openfga/sample-stores) is updated with the type restrictions
11. [openfga/openfga.dev](https://github.com/openfga/openfga.dev) is updated to include type restrictions in the documentation

## Drawbacks

> - Floating user_ids with no type can no longer be supported (as adding types requires objects hava type)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Floating user_ids with no type can no longer be supported (as adding types requires objects have a type)
```

### What is the expected outcome?

- Using the extra type information we get from this change, we will be able to more easily traverse the graph in reverse, thus allowing us to provide a solution for reverse expansion and optimizing the ListObjects endpoint.
- Users reading an authorization model will be able to better interpret its meaning (for example by understanding that repository owners must be either users or group members).

## What it is?

This RFC proposes an update to the OpenFGA JSON syntax requiring users to indicate all the types of users that could be **directly related** to an object of a certain type through a particular relation.

For example,

- parents of a document have to be objects of type folder
- owners of a repository have to be of type user or a userset of group members

> 

Author: Can you expand on this?

> 

Reviewer: What I meant is that we listed the JSON syntax for the entire model and then explain line by line

> 

Reviewer: TY.  Much easier to follow

# Add Type Restrictions to the JSON Syntax

## Meta

- **Name**: Add Type Restrictions to the JSON Syntax
- **Start Date**: 2022-08-31
- **Author(s)**: [rhamzeh](https://github.com/rhamzeh)
- **Status**: Draft <!-- Acceptable values: Draft, Approved, On Hold, Superseded -->
- **RFC Pull Request**: https://github.com/openfga/rfcs/pull/7
- **Relevant Issues**:
  - https://github.com/openfga/rfcs/pull/3
  - https://github.com/openfga/rfcs/pull/4
  - https://github.com/openfga/api/pull/27
- **Supersedes**: N/A

## Summary

Allow users to indicate in their store's authorization model what types of objects can have a particular relation to an object type.

## Definitions

- [OpenFGA JSON Syntax](https://openfga.dev/docs/configuration-language)
- [OpenFGA DSL](https://openfga.dev/docs/configuration-language)
- [ListObjects Endpoint](https://openfga.dev/api/service#/Relationship%20Queries/ListObjects)
- [What is a user?](https://openfga.dev/docs/concepts#what-is-a-user)
- Floating User ID: A user identifier without a type (e.g. `anne`, `4` or `4179af14-f0c0-4930-88fd-5570c7bf6f59`)

> - Reverse Expansion: Normally [expand](https://openfga.dev/docs/interacting/relationship-queries#expand) takes an object and relation and returns the first leaves of users who are related. Reverse expand would be the opposite, taking a user and a relation and retuning the objects who are related.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Reverse Expansion: Normally [expand](https://openfga.dev/docs/interacting/relationship-queries#expand) takes an object and relation and returns the first leaves of users who are related. Reverse expand would be the opposite, taking a user and a relation and returning the objects which are related.
```

## Motivation

> ### Why should we do this?

Reviewer 3: I don't know if it is relevant at this point, but it will also help us implement the indexer (Leopard).

- having the following `"member": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "user" }, { "type": "group", "relation": "member" }] }` in the group type definition indicates that only objects of type user or usersets of type group and relation member can be directly related to a group as member
- having the following `"member": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "user", "any": true }, { "type": "employee", "any": true }] }` in the group type definition indicates that the `*` syntax is allowed and that when present, it means all objects of type `user` or `employee` can be directly related to a `group` as `member`

This will affect only relations that are [directly related](https://openfga.dev/docs/modeling/building-blocks/direct-relationships) (as in they are considered "assignable" and have [the direct relationship keyword ("this")](https://openfga.dev/docs/configuration-language#the-direct-relationship-keyword) in their relation definition).
For relation definitions that:

- have the direct relationship keyword (this): `directly_related_user_types` must be present and MUST be an non-empty array containing at least one type/relation combination

> - do not have the direct relationship keyword: `directly_related_user_types` can optionally be present, but if it does MUST be an empty array

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- do not have the direct relationship keyword: `directly_related_user_types` can optionally be present, but if it is, it MUST be an empty array
```

> Note: This syntax does not offer a way to enforce restrictions based on what the userset of group members resolves to (for example, group member can be a user, an employee or another userset). Later on, tooling can help visually indicate this to the user inline.

> To prevent breaking changes, this will be done by appending a new field called `metadata` -> `relations` to each type definition. Each relation will be a key under this that is a map that contains a field called `directly_related_user_types` that contains what type or type and relation combination could be directly related to it. If the `*` element is valid for that relation, then the type and `any: true` need to be in the `directly_related_user_types`. If multiple entries that contains `any: true` are present, a `*` in a relationship tuple will be interpreted to mean any user of the union of those types.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To prevent breaking changes, this will be done by appending a new field called `metadata` -> `relations` to each type definition. Each relation will be a key under this that is a map that contains a field called `directly_related_user_types` that contains what type or type and relation combination could be directly related to it. If the `*` element is valid for that relation, then the type and `any: true` needs to be in `directly_related_user_types`. If multiple entries where `any: true` are present, a `*` in a relationship tuple will be interpreted to mean any user of the union of those types.
```

But I am not sure I understand the last sentence. An example could help.

Author: Added an example

A directly related user type cannot contain both a `relation` key and an `any` key. If the `any` key is excluded, it will be interpreted to be `any: false`.

The introduced `metadata` entry in the type definition would look like:

```typescript
type DirectlyRelatedUserTypeBase = {
  type: string;
};

type DirectlyRelatedUserTypeRelation = {
  relation?: string;
};

type DirectlyRelatedUserTypeAny = {
  any?: boolean;
};

type DirectlyRelatedUserType = DirectlyRelatedUserTypeBase &
  (DirectlyRelatedUserTypeRelation | DirectlyRelatedUserTypeAny);

type RelationMetadata = {
  directly_related_user_types?: DirectlyRelatedUserType[];
};

type Metadata = {
  relations?: Record<string, RelationMetadata>;
};
```

> If a tuple such as `user=team:1#member, relation=member, object=group:2` needs to be added, then the `member` relation on the `group` type must have `{"type":"group","relation":"member"}` as one of its directly related user types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a tuple such as `user=team:1#member, relation=member, object=group:2` needs to be added, then the `member` relation on the `group` type must have `{"type":"team","relation":"member"}` as one of its directly related user types.
```

?

As an example:

```json
{ "type_definitions": [

>   { "type": "user" },

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/openfga/syntax-transformer/blob/main/src/friendly-to-api.ts#L63

This would actually be `type: user, relations: {}`

  { "type": "group",
    "relations": {
      "parent": { "this": {} },
      "member": { "this": {} },
    },
    "metadata": {
      "relations": {
        "parent": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "group" }] },
        "member": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "user", "any": true }, { "type": "group", "relation": "member" }] }
      }
    }
  },
] }
```

### Adding a Schema Version Field

In order to make sure we can easily parse the model across updates (and this will be especially true when breaking changes are introduced), we are proposing to add a version to the model.

This version will be called the `schema_version` in order not be confused with an update to the authorization model itself (frequently referenced as a new authorization model version). It will be of the form "x.y", where both `x` and `y` are non-negative integers. `x` will start from `1` instead of `0`, so the initial version of the authorization model will be `1.0` and this RFC once implemented will introduce `1.1`.

This field is optional, and when missing will be interpreted as being `1.0`.

```json
{
  "schema_version": "1.1",

>   "type_definitions": [

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  "type_definitions": [ ... ]
```

   - `write(user=user:1, parent, group:1)`; invalid, the `user` type is not in the list of directly related user types for the `parent` relation of the `group` type

2. If the user is a userset:
   - `write(user=group:2#member, member, group:1)`; valid, the `(type=group, relation=member)` is in the list of directly related user types for the `member` relation of the `group` type
   - `write(user=group:2#member, parent, group:1)`; invalid, the `(type=group, relation=member)` is not in the list of directly related user types for the `parent` relation of the `group` type
   - `write(user=group:2#parent, member, group:1)`; invalid, the `(type=group, relation=parent)` is not in the list of directly related user types for the `member` relation of the `group` type
   - `write(user=group:2#parent, parent, group:1)`; invalid, the `(type=group, relation=parent)` is not in the list of directly related user types for the `parent` relation of the `group` type

3. If the user is `*`:
   - `write(user=*, parent, group:1)`; invalid, the `parent` relation on the `group` type does not allow for any `*` relation

>    - `write(user=*, member, group:1)`; valid, the `member` relation on the `group` type allows for the `*` relation (and it will be considered all objects of type `user`)

Reviewer 2: I thought that the `write(*, member, group:1)` syntax wouldn't be valid anymore and you'd have to `write(user:*, member, group:1)`

If this not the case then why do we have a `type` in  `{ "type": "user", "any": true }` ?

Reviewer 3: Yes, I am a bit confused here too.

Author: * is valid, if any of the directly related user types has `any:true` in it.

You cannot write user:*, as that is an opject of type `user` and id `*`

Reviewer: As discussed offline, should we consider restricting `*` so that in the future, we can allow restrict 
write(user=*, parent, group:1)
write(admin=*, parent, group:1) 
So that in the future, we can decide to restrict * to a particular type.  And in the very least, prevent confusion and mistake.

Reviewer: We can decide to punt this to a later PR to keep the scope of RFC smaller

When the time comes, check will be updated to ignore relationship tuples in the database that do not match the directly related user types in the authorization model.

## Migration

### Migrating existing authorization models

Existing models will not be migrated - new models will be required to use types (with an optional grace period). Authorization models that do not make use of types will not be able to use the optimized ListObjects endpoint and will fallback to the existing brute force implementation.

### Migrating existing tuples

Due to the users in the tuples now required to have types in order to enforce the restrictions, existing tuples with users as floating user identifiers with no types will no longer be valid when types are added. These tuples will not be removed from the system, and will still be valid while the legacy authorization model is supported, but will be ignored during evaluation on newer authorization models with type restrictions in place.

This will need to be communicated to developers so that they can migrate accordingly by:

> 1. Introducing a `user` type to the model
> 2. Reading all exiting relationship tuples to find ones with a user that has no type
> 3. Writing a mirror of that tuple where the user has the correct type
> 4. Migrating their app code to perform checks using that type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Introducing a `user` type to the model
2. Reading all existing relationship tuples to find those with floating user IDs
3. Writing a copy of that tuple but with the `user` type
4. Migrating their app code to perform checks using that type
```

> One option for developers administrating an OpenFGA installation could be a script to check the DB (look for tuples in the DB that do not have `user_type`), and prints the offending store IDs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One option for developers administrating an OpenFGA installation could be a script to check the DB (look for tuples in the DB that do not have `user_type`), and print the offending store IDs.
```

Automatic unassisted tuple migration will not be feasible because it is not possible to know what type end users will want to use for each offending tuple.

### Affected Modules

> This change will affect repositories across the board. It will entail changes to the [protobuf](https://github.com/openfga/api), the [openfga core](https://github.com/openfga/openfga), the DSL, the [syntax transformer](https://github.com/openfga/syntax-transformer), the [SDKs](https://github.com/openfga/sdk-generator), the FGA Playground, the [sample stores](https://github.com/openfga/sample-stores) and the [documentation](https://github.com/openfga/openfga.dev).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This change will affect repositories across the board. It will entail changes to the [protobufs](https://github.com/openfga/api), the [openfga core](https://github.com/openfga/openfga), the DSL, the [syntax transformer](https://github.com/openfga/syntax-transformer), the [SDKs](https://github.com/openfga/sdk-generator), the FGA Playground, the [sample stores](https://github.com/openfga/sample-stores) and the [documentation](https://github.com/openfga/openfga.dev).
```

#### Language, API and SDKs

> For the scope of this RFC, we are proposing that the initial phase be backwards compatible and not a breaking change. This will allow users on previous versions to keep using them for a while, similarly changes to the public surface of the API and SDKs are reduced.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the scope of this RFC, we are proposing that the initial phase be backwards compatible and not a breaking change. This will allow users on previous versions to keep using them during a grace period while keeping changes to the public surface of the API and SDKs to a minimum.
```

> A later RFC can introduce the upgraded syntax where the extension now placed in metadata can be migrated. That phase can be combined with other breaking changes we are introducing to minimize user-disruption.

Reviewer 3: I am not quite sure what this line is saying:

> A later RFC will introduce an upgraded syntax ...

Author: Rephrased

#### DSL

> An update to the DSL needs to happen to support type with no definitions, as a lot of developers will now have to include a user type and it may not have any relations on it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a lot of developers will now have to include a user type and it may not have any relations on it, an update to the DSL needs to happen to support types with no relations:

`type user
  relations none
`
```

    },
    "metadata": {
      "relations": {
        "parent": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "group" }] },
        "member": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "employee" }, { "type": "group", "relation": "member" }] },
        "guest": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "user" }, { "type": "employee" }, { "type": "group", "relation": "member" }], "allow_public": true }
      }
    }
  }
] }
```

A `directly_related_user_types` array to each relation to indicate what types of users can be directly related to the relation. It will be an array of objects, each object must have a type and an optional relation.

- having the following `"parent": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "group" }] }` in the `group` type definition indicates that only objects of type `group` can be directly related to a `group` as `parent`
- having the following `"member": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "user" }, { "type": "group", "relation": "member" }] }` in the `group` type definition indicates that only objects of type `user` or usersets of type `group` and relation `member` can be directly related to a `group` as `member`

> - having the following `"guest": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "user" }, { "type": "employee" }], "allow_public": true }` in the `group` type definition indicates that the `*` syntax is allowed and that when present, it means all objects of type `user` or `employee` can be directly related to a `group` as `member`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- having the following `"guest": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "user" }, { "type": "employee" }], "allow_public": true }` in the `guest` type definition indicates that the `*` syntax is allowed and that when present, it means all objects of type `user` or `employee` can be directly related to a `guest` as `member`
```

> - having the following `"member": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "user" }, { "type": "employee" }], "allow_public": true }` in the `group` type definition indicates that the `*` syntax is allowed and that when present, it means all objects of type `user` or `employee` can be directly related to a `group` as `member`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- having the following `"guest": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "user" }, { "type": "employee" }], "allow_public": true }` in the `group` type definition indicates that the `*` syntax is allowed and that when present, it means all objects of type `user` or `employee` can be directly related to a `group` as `member`
```

   - `write(user=group:2#member, parent, group:1)`; invalid, the `(type=group, relation=member)` is not in the list of directly related user types for the `parent` relation of the `group` type
   - `write(user=group:2#parent, member, group:1)`; invalid, the `(type=group, relation=parent)` is not in the list of directly related user types for the `member` relation of the `group` type
   - `write(user=group:2#parent, parent, group:1)`; invalid, the `(type=group, relation=parent)` is not in the list of directly related user types for the `parent` relation of the `group` type

3. If the user is `*`:
   - `write(user=*, parent, group:1)`; valid, it will mean all objects that are of type `group` are related to `group:1` as parent. (Note that objects of type `user` or `employee` are not related, because they are not in the `directly_related_user_types` array)
   - `write(user=*, member, group:1)`; valid, it will mean all objects that are of type `user` or `employee` are related to `group:1` as member. (Note that objects of type `group` are not related, because they are not in the `directly_related_user_types` array)

>    - `write(user=*, can_read, group:1)`; invalid, the `can_read` relation on the `group` type does not allow direct relationship tuples (no `this` in the relation definition).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - `write(user=*, can_view, group:1)`; invalid, the `can_view` relation on the `group` type does not allow direct relationship tuples (no `this` in the relation definition).
```

### What is the expected outcome?

- Using the extra type information we get from this change, we will be able to more easily traverse the graph in reverse, thus allowing us to provide a solution for reverse expansion and optimizing the ListObjects endpoint.
- Users reading an authorization model will be able to better interpret its meaning (for example by understanding that repository owners must be either users or group members).

## What it is?

### Adding Type Restrictions

This RFC proposes an update to the OpenFGA JSON syntax requiring users to indicate all the types of users that could be **directly related** to an object of a certain type through a particular relation.

For example, our current syntax allows expressing the following:

- documents have parents
- repositories have owners

But cannot express restrictions such as:

- parents of a document have to be objects of type folder
- owners of a repository have to be of type user or a userset of group members

We introduce a `metadata` entry in the type definition would look like:

```typescript
type Metadata = {
  relations?: Record<string, RelationMetadata>;
};

type RelationMetadata = {

>   allow_public?: Boolean;

Reviewer 4: I think we'll need this to be more specific than just a global whitelist for public access on any of the allowed types. It needs to be restricted to public access of a particular type (e.g. `user:*` or `group:*`). Meaning that public access is allowed, but it's still restricted to a particular type. This constrains our typesystem and thus our search space, which allows for more efficient graph evaluation and stronger type guarantees.

I propose we change this to something like:

```
directly_related_user_types: [{type: "user", relation: "*"}]
```
which means that the `user:*` userset (all users) can be assigned to the relation.

Author: I'm struggling to find a use case for that, we supported that one first, but it seems more convoluted.

You define the types, and as an extra you decide whether it can be public or not.

I actually considered removing that from the current RFC because it seems like out of scope.

Author: Allow public has been removed from this RFC to be reintroduced later if need be

>   directly_related_user_types?: DirectlyRelatedUserType[];

Reviewer 4: I may suggest just a slight rename here.. `assignable_object_relations` or `assignable_relationship_refs` or `assignable_relationship_types`

Author: Assignable is nice, but we don't use it anywhere else as a term - so it is weird to have it in the spec.

I struggle a bit with the naming, because in its essence, this is neither assignable_object_relations nor directly_related_user_types.

};

> type DirectlyRelatedUserType = {

Reviewer 4: In the protobufs I've been using I've been calling this a `RelationReference` which takes the form

```
message RelationReference {
    string object_type = 1;
    string relation = 2;
}
```
because it's a reference to a relation of a particular object type.

It'd be nice if we could use this form here and elsewhere, because we'll be passing around objects of this kind all over the place.

Author: In this case, relation is optional - so it can be an type, not just a type, relation combination

Reviewer 4: ```
message DirectlyRelatedUserType {
   oneof ref {
      string type = 1;
      RelationReference = 2;
   }
}
```
maybe that instead?

  type: string;
  relation?: string;
};
```

The following is an example of the changes we are proposing, an explanation of the additions will follow:

```json
{ "type_definitions": [
  { "type": "user", "relations": {} },
  { "type": "employee", "relations": {} },
  { "type": "group",
    "relations": {
      "parent": { "this": {} },
      "member": { "this": {} },
      "guest": { "this": {} },
    },
    "metadata": {
      "relations": {
        "parent": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "group" }] },
        "member": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "employee" }, { "type": "group", "relation": "member" }] },
        "guest": { "directly_related_user_types": [{ "type": "user" }, { "type": "employee" }, { "type": "group", "relation": "member" }], "allow_public": true }
      }
    }
  }
] }
```

> A `directly_related_user_types` array to each relation to indicate what types of users can be directly related to the relation. It will be an array of objects, each object must have a type and an optional relation.

Reviewer 4: I think we should revisit this name a bit. This restriction should restrict by object relation, not just object type. So calling it `directly_related_user_types` is a bit misleading IMO.

For example, we could have `user` or `group#member` as a restriction. So what we're technically restricting on is a relation of a particular object type. I like to think of it more like we're restricting `user#...` or `group#member`, but since we do not represent ellipses in anyway, we just say `user` or `group#member`
